HELP CONSTANTS                                   John Williams, Jun 1995

This file lists the constants that are present as external symbols of
the Common-Lisp and Poplog packages when Poplog Common Lisp starts up.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------
1  Constants in the Common-Lisp Package
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Constant Name                           REF file
-------------                           --------

array-dimension-limit                   arrays
array-rank-limit                        arrays
array-total-size-limit                  arrays
boole-1                                 numbers
boole-2                                 numbers
boole-and                               numbers
boole-andc1                             numbers
boole-andc2                             numbers
boole-c1                                numbers
boole-c2                                numbers
boole-clr                               numbers
boole-eqv                               numbers
boole-ior                               numbers
boole-nand                              numbers
boole-nor                               numbers
boole-orc1                              numbers
boole-orc2                              numbers
boole-set                               numbers
boole-xor                               numbers
call-arguments-limit                    control
char-code-limit                         characters
double-float-epsilon                    numbers
double-float-negative-epsilon           numbers
internal-time-units-per-second          misc
lambda-list-keywords                    progstruct
lambda-parameters-limit                 progstruct
least-negative-double-float             numbers
least-negative-long-float               numbers
least-negative-short-float              numbers
least-negative-single-float             numbers
least-positive-double-float             numbers
least-positive-long-float               numbers
least-positive-short-float              numbers
least-positive-single-float             numbers
long-float-epsilon                      numbers
long-float-negative-epsilon             numbers
most-negative-double-float              numbers
most-negative-fixnum                    numbers
most-negative-long-float                numbers
most-negative-short-float               numbers
most-negative-single-float              numbers
most-positive-double-float              numbers
most-positive-fixnum                    numbers
most-positive-long-float                numbers
most-positive-short-float               numbers
most-positive-single-float              numbers
multiple-values-limit                   control
nil                                     predicates
pi                                      numbers
short-float-epsilon                     numbers
short-float-negative-epsilon            numbers
single-float-epsilon                    numbers
single-float-negative-epsilon           numbers
t                                       predicates


-----------------------------------------------------------------------
2  Constants in the Poplog Package
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

*default-package-size*                  poplog_only
*default-package-use-list*              poplog_only
<termin>                                poplog_only



--- C.all/lisp/help/constants
--- Copyright University of Sussex 1995. All rights reserved.
