HELP FUNCTIONS                                   John Williams, Jun 1995

This file  lists  the  functions, macros,  and  special-forms  that  are
present as external symbols of the Common-Lisp and Poplog packages  when
Poplog Common Lisp starts up.

In the table below, the meanings of the column titles are as follows:

    Args:       The number of arguments  the function takes. Macros  are
                denoted by the word macro; special-forms by special.

    Inline?:    If inline, this function is compiled inline by default.

                If (inline), this function will be compiled inline  only
                if explicitly so declared.

                If  c-macro,  then  this  function  has  an   associated
                compiler macro expansion function.

                Otherwise, the function can never be compiled inline.

    REF file:   The name of the REF file where further information about
                the function can be found.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------
1  Functions in the Common-Lisp Package
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Function Name                     Args      Inline?         REF file
-------------                     ----      ------          --------

*                                 0 +       inline          numbers
+                                 0 +       inline          numbers
-                                 1 +       inline          numbers
/                                 1 +       inline          numbers
/=                                1 +       inline          numbers
1+                                1         c-macro         numbers
1-                                1         c-macro         numbers
<                                 1 +       inline          numbers
<=                                1 +       inline          numbers
=                                 1 +       inline          numbers
>                                 1 +       inline          numbers
>=                                1 +       inline          numbers
abort                             0-1                       conditions
abs                               1                         numbers
acons                             3                         lists
acos                              1                         numbers
acosh                             1                         numbers
add-method                        2 +                       clos
adjoin                            2 +       c-macro         lists
adjust-array                      2 +                       arrays
adjustable-array-p                1                         arrays
allocate-instance                 1 +                       -
alpha-char-p                      1                         characters
alphanumericp                     1                         characters
and                               macro                     predicates
append                            0 +       inline          lists
apply                             2 +       inline          control
apropos                           1-2                       misc
apropos-list                      1-2                       misc
aref                              1 +       (inline)        arrays
arithmetic-error-operands         1 +                       conditions
arithmetic-error-operation        1 +                       conditions
array-dimension                   2                         arrays
array-dimensions                  1                         arrays
array-element-type                1                         arrays
array-has-fill-pointer-p          1                         arrays
array-in-bounds-p                 1 +                       arrays
array-rank                        1                         arrays
array-row-major-index             1 +                       arrays
array-total-size                  1                         arrays
arrayp                            1                         predicates
ash                               2                         numbers
asin                              1                         numbers
asinh                             1                         numbers
assert                            macro                     conditions
assoc                             2 +       c-macro         lists
assoc-if                          2 +                       lists
assoc-if-not                      2 +                       lists
atan                              1-2                       numbers
atanh                             1                         numbers
atom                              1                         predicates
bit                               1 +                       arrays
bit-and                           2-3                       arrays
bit-andc1                         2-3                       arrays
bit-andc2                         2-3                       arrays
bit-eqv                           2-3                       arrays
bit-ior                           2-3                       arrays
bit-nand                          2-3                       arrays
bit-nor                           2-3                       arrays
bit-not                           1-2                       arrays
bit-orc1                          2-3                       arrays
bit-orc2                          2-3                       arrays
bit-vector-p                      1                         predicates
bit-xor                           2-3                       arrays
block                             special                   control
boole                             3         inline          numbers
both-case-p                       1                         characters
boundp                            1                         control
break                             0 +                       conditions
broadcast-stream-streams          1                         streams
butlast                           1-2                       lists
byte                              2                         numbers
byte-position                     1                         numbers
byte-size                         1                         numbers
caaaar                            1                         lists
caaadr                            1                         lists
caaar                             1                         lists
caadar                            1                         lists
caaddr                            1                         lists
caadr                             1                         lists
caar                              1         (inline)        lists
cadaar                            1                         lists
cadadr                            1                         lists
cadar                             1                         lists
caddar                            1                         lists
cadddr                            1                         lists
caddr                             1                         lists
cadr                              1         (inline)        lists
call-next-method                  0 +                       clos
car                               1         (inline)        lists
case                              macro                     control
catch                             special                   control
ccase                             macro                     conditions
cdaaar                            1                         lists
cdaadr                            1                         lists
cdaar                             1                         lists
cdadar                            1                         lists
cdaddr                            1                         lists
cdadr                             1                         lists
cdar                              1         (inline)        lists
cddaar                            1                         lists
cddadr                            1                         lists
cddar                             1                         lists
cdddar                            1                         lists
cddddr                            1                         lists
cdddr                             1                         lists
cddr                              1         (inline)        lists
cdr                               1         (inline)        lists
ceiling                           1-2                       numbers
cell-error-name                   1 +                       conditions
cerror                            2 +                       conditions
change-class                      2 +                       clos
char                              2                         strings
char-code                         1         (inline)        characters
char-downcase                     1                         characters
char-equal                        1 +                       characters
char-greaterp                     1 +                       characters
char-int                          1         (inline)        characters
char-lessp                        1 +                       characters
char-name                         1                         characters
char-not-equal                    1 +                       characters
char-not-greaterp                 1 +                       characters
char-not-lessp                    1 +                       characters
char-upcase                       1                         characters
char/=                            1 +                       characters
char<                             1 +       inline          characters
char<=                            1 +       inline          characters
char=                             1 +       inline          characters
char>                             1 +       inline          characters
char>=                            1 +       inline          characters
character                         1                         characters
characterp                        1                         predicates
check-type                        macro                     conditions
cis                               1                         numbers
class-name                        1 +                       clos
class-of                          1                         clos
clear-input                       0-1                       io
clear-output                      0-1                       io
close                             1 +                       streams
clrhash                           1                         hashtables
code-char                         1         (inline)        characters
coerce                            2                         typespecs
compile                           1-2                       misc
compile-file                      0 +                       misc
compiled-function-p               1                         predicates
compiler-macro-function           1-2                       macros
compiler-macroexpand              1-2                       macros
compiler-macroexpand-1            1-2                       macros
complement                        1         inline          sequences
complex                           1-2                       numbers
complexp                          1                         predicates
compute-applicable-methods        2                         clos
compute-restarts                  0-1                       conditions
concatenate                       1 +       inline          sequences
concatenated-stream-streams       1                         streams
cond                              macro                     control
conjugate                         1                         numbers
cons                              2                         lists
consp                             1                         predicates
constantly                        1         inline          -
constantp                         1                         evaluator
continue                          0-1                       conditions
copy-alist                        1                         lists
copy-list                         1                         lists
copy-readtable                    0-2                       io
copy-seq                          1                         sequences
copy-symbol                       1-2                       symbols
copy-tree                         1                         lists
cos                               1                         numbers
cosh                              1                         numbers
count                             2 +                       sequences
count-if                          2 +                       sequences
count-if-not                      2 +                       sequences
ctypecase                         macro                     conditions
decf                              macro                     numbers
declaim                           macro                     declarations
declare                           special                   declarations
decode-float                      1                         numbers
decode-universal-time             1-2                       misc
defclass                          macro                     clos
defconstant                       macro                     progstruct
defgeneric                        macro                     clos
define-compiler-macro             macro                     macros
define-condition                  macro                     conditions
define-method-combination         macro                     clos
define-modify-macro               macro                     control
define-setf-method                macro                     control
defmacro                          macro                     macros
defmethod                         macro                     clos
defpackage                        macro                     packages
defparameter                      macro                     progstruct
defsetf                           macro                     control
defstruct                         macro                     structures
deftype                           macro                     typespecs
defun                             macro                     progstruct
defvar                            macro                     progstruct
delete                            2 +                       sequences
delete-duplicates                 1 +                       sequences
delete-file                       1                         filesys
delete-if                         2 +                       sequences
delete-if-not                     2 +                       sequences
delete-package                    1                         packages
denominator                       1                         numbers
deposit-field                     3                         numbers
describe                          1                         misc
destructuring-bind                macro                     macros
digit-char                        1-2                       characters
digit-char-p                      1-2                       characters
directory                         0 +                       filesys
directory-namestring              1                         filesys
disassemble                       1                         misc
do                                macro                     control
do*                               macro                     control
do-all-symbols                    macro                     packages
do-external-symbols               macro                     packages
do-symbols                        macro                     packages
documentation                     1 +                       clos
dolist                            macro                     control
dotimes                           macro                     control
dpb                               3                         numbers
dribble                           0-1                       misc
ecase                             macro                     conditions
echo-stream-input-stream          1                         streams
echo-stream-output-stream         1                         streams
ed                                0-1                       misc
eighth                            1         (inline)        lists
elt                               2                         sequences
encode-universal-time             6-7                       misc
endp                              1         c-macro         lists
enough-namestring                 1-2                       filesys
ensure-generic-function           1 +                       clos
eq                                2                         predicates
eql                               2         inline          predicates
equal                             2         inline          predicates
equalp                            2                         predicates
error                             1 +                       conditions
etypecase                         macro                     conditions
eval                              1                         evaluator
eval-when                         special                   progstruct
evenp                             1                         numbers
every                             2 +                       sequences
exp                               1                         numbers
export                            1-2                       packages
expt                              2                         numbers
fboundp                           1                         control
fceiling                          1-2                       numbers
fdefinition                       1                         control
ffloor                            1-2                       numbers
fifth                             1         (inline)        lists
file-author                       1                         filesys
file-error-pathname               1 +                       conditions
file-length                       1                         filesys
file-namestring                   1                         filesys
file-position                     1-2                       filesys
file-string-length                2                         filesys
file-write-date                   1                         filesys
fill                              2 +                       sequences
fill-pointer                      1                         arrays
find                              2 +                       sequences
find-all-symbols                  1                         packages
find-class                        1-3                       clos
find-if                           2 +                       sequences
find-if-not                       2 +                       sequences
find-method                       3 +                       clos
find-package                      1                         packages
find-restart                      1-2                       conditions
find-symbol                       1-2                       packages
finish-output                     0-1                       io
first                             1         (inline)        lists
flet                              special                   control
float                             1-2                       numbers
float-digits                      1                         numbers
float-precision                   1                         numbers
float-radix                       1                         numbers
float-sign                        1-2                       numbers
floatp                            1                         predicates
floor                             1-2                       numbers
fmakunbound                       1                         control
force-output                      0-1                       io
format                            2 +                       io
fourth                            1         (inline)        lists
fresh-line                        0-1                       io
fround                            1-2                       numbers
ftruncate                         1-2                       numbers
funcall                           1 +       inline          control
function                          special                   control
function-keywords                 1                         clos
function-lambda-expression        1                         misc
functionp                         1                         predicates
gcd                               0 +                       numbers
generic-function                  macro                     clos
gensym                            0-1                       symbols
gentemp                           0-2                       symbols
get                               2-3       (inline)        symbols
get-decoded-time                  0                         misc
get-dispatch-macro-character      2-3                       io
get-internal-real-time            0                         misc
get-internal-run-time             0                         misc
get-macro-character               1-2                       io
get-output-stream-string          1                         streams
get-properties                    2                         symbols
get-setf-method                   1-2                       control
get-setf-method-multiple-value    1-2                       control
get-universal-time                0                         misc
getf                              2-3                       symbols
gethash                           2-3                       hashtables
go                                special                   control
graphic-char-p                    1                         characters
handler-bind                      macro                     conditions
handler-case                      macro                     conditions
hash-table-count                  1                         hashtables
hash-table-p                      1                         hashtables
hash-table-rehash-size            1                         hashtables
hash-table-rehash-threshold       1                         hashtables
hash-table-size                   1                         hashtables
hash-table-test                   1                         hashtables
host-namestring                   1                         filesys
identity                          1                         misc
if                                special                   control
ignore-errors                     macro                     conditions
imagpart                          1                         numbers
import                            1-2                       packages
in-package                        macro                     packages
incf                              macro                     numbers
initialize-instance               1 +                       clos
input-stream-p                    1                         streams
inspect                           1                         misc
integer-decode-float              1                         numbers
integer-length                    1                         numbers
integerp                          1                         predicates
interactive-stream-p              1                         streams
intern                            1-2                       packages
intersection                      2 +                       lists
invalid-method-error              2 +                       clos
invoke-debugger                   1 +                       conditions
invoke-restart                    1 +                       conditions
invoke-restart-interactively      1                         conditions
isqrt                             1                         numbers
keywordp                          1                         symbols
labels                            special                   control
lambda                            macro                     progstruct
last                              1-2                       lists
lcm                               0 +                       numbers
ldb                               2                         numbers
ldb-test                          2                         numbers
ldiff                             2                         lists
length                            1                         sequences
let                               special                   control
let*                              special                   control
lisp-implementation-type          0                         misc
lisp-implementation-version       0                         misc
list                              0 +       inline          lists
list*                             1 +       inline          lists
list-all-packages                 0                         packages
list-length                       1                         lists
listen                            0-1                       io
listp                             1                         predicates
load                              1 +                       filesys
load-logical-pathname-translations  1                       filesys
load-time-value                   special                   misc
locally                           special                   declarations
log                               1-2                       numbers
logand                            0 +       inline          numbers
logandc1                          2                         numbers
logandc2                          2                         numbers
logbitp                           2                         numbers
logcount                          1                         numbers
logeqv                            0 +       inline          numbers
logical-pathname                  1                         filesys
logical-pathname-translations     1                         filesys
logior                            0 +       inline          numbers
lognand                           2                         numbers
lognor                            2                         numbers
lognot                            1                         numbers
logorc1                           2                         numbers
logorc2                           2                         numbers
logtest                           2                         numbers
logxor                            0 +       inline          numbers
long-site-name                    0                         misc
loop                              macro                     control
loop-finish                       macro                     control
lower-case-p                      1                         characters
machine-instance                  0                         misc
machine-type                      0                         misc
machine-version                   0                         misc
macro-function                    1-2                       macros
macroexpand                       1-2                       macros
macroexpand-1                     1-2                       macros
macrolet                          special                   control
make-array                        1 +                       arrays
make-broadcast-stream             0 +                       streams
make-concatenated-stream          0 +                       streams
make-condition                    1 +                       conditions
make-dispatch-macro-character     1-3                       io
make-echo-stream                  2                         streams
make-hash-table                   0 +                       hashtables
make-instance                     1 +                       clos
make-instances-obsolete           1 +                       clos
make-list                         1 +                       lists
make-load-form                    1 +                       filesys
make-load-form-saving-slots       1-2                       filesys
make-package                      1 +                       packages
make-pathname                     0 +                       filesys
make-random-state                 0-1                       numbers
make-sequence                     2 +                       sequences
make-string                       1 +                       strings
make-string-input-stream          1-3                       streams
make-string-output-stream         0 +                       streams
make-symbol                       1                         symbols
make-synonym-stream               1                         streams
make-two-way-stream               2                         streams
makunbound                        1                         control
map                               3 +                       sequences
map-into                          2 +                       sequences
mapc                              2 +                       control
mapcan                            2 +                       control
mapcar                            2 +       c-macro         control
mapcon                            2 +                       control
maphash                           2                         hashtables
mapl                              2 +                       control
maplist                           2 +                       control
mask-field                        2                         numbers
max                               1 +                       numbers
member                            2 +       c-macro         lists
member-if                         2 +                       lists
member-if-not                     2 +                       lists
merge                             4 +                       sequences
merge-pathnames                   1-3                       filesys
method-combination-error          1 +                       clos
method-qualifiers                 1 +                       clos
min                               1 +                       numbers
minusp                            1                         numbers
mismatch                          2 +                       sequences
mod                               2                         numbers
muffle-warning                    0-1                       conditions
multiple-value-bind               macro     c-macro         control
multiple-value-call               special                   control
multiple-value-list               macro     c-macro         control
multiple-value-prog1              special                   control
multiple-value-setq               macro     c-macro         control
name-char                         1                         characters
namestring                        1                         filesys
nbutlast                          1-2                       lists
nconc                             0 +       inline          lists
nintersection                     2 +                       lists
ninth                             1         (inline)        lists
no-applicable-method              1 +                       clos
no-next-method                    2 +                       clos
not                               1         c-macro         predicates
notany                            2 +                       sequences
notevery                          2 +                       sequences
nreconc                           2                         lists
nreverse                          1                         sequences
nset-difference                   2 +                       lists
nset-exclusive-or                 2 +                       lists
nstring-capitalize                1 +                       strings
nstring-downcase                  1 +                       strings
nstring-upcase                    1 +                       strings
nsublis                           2 +                       lists
nsubst                            3 +                       lists
nsubst-if                         3 +                       lists
nsubst-if-not                     3 +                       lists
nsubstitute                       3 +                       sequences
nsubstitute-if                    3 +                       sequences
nsubstitute-if-not                3 +                       sequences
nth                               2                         lists
nth-value                         macro     c-macro         control
nthcdr                            2                         lists
null                              1         c-macro         predicates
numberp                           1                         predicates
numerator                         1                         numbers
nunion                            2 +                       lists
oddp                              1                         numbers
open                              1 +                       filesys
open-stream-p                     1                         streams
or                                macro                     predicates
output-stream-p                   1                         streams
package-error-package             1 +                       conditions
package-name                      1                         packages
package-nicknames                 1                         packages
package-shadowing-symbols         1                         packages
package-use-list                  1                         packages
package-used-by-list              1                         packages
packagep                          1                         predicates
pairlis                           2-3                       lists
parse-integer                     1 +                       io
parse-namestring                  1 +                       filesys
pathname                          1                         filesys
pathname-device                   1 +                       filesys
pathname-directory                1 +                       filesys
pathname-host                     1 +                       filesys
pathname-match-p                  2                         filesys
pathname-name                     1 +                       filesys
pathname-type                     1 +                       filesys
pathname-version                  1                         filesys
pathnamep                         1                         filesys
peek-char                         0-5                       io
phase                             1                         numbers
plusp                             1                         numbers
pop                               macro     inline          lists
position                          2 +                       sequences
position-if                       2 +                       sequences
position-if-not                   2 +                       sequences
pprint                            1-2                       io
prin1                             1-2                       io
prin1-to-string                   1                         io
princ                             1-2                       io
princ-to-string                   1                         io
print                             1-2                       io
print-object                      2 +                       clos
print-unreadable-object           macro                     io
probe-file                        1                         filesys
proclaim                          1                         declarations
prog                              macro                     control
prog*                             macro                     control
prog1                             macro                     control
prog2                             macro                     control
progn                             special                   control
progv                             special                   control
provide                           1                         packages
psetf                             macro                     control
psetq                             macro     c-macro         control
push                              macro                     lists
pushnew                           macro                     lists
quote                             special                   control
random                            1-2                       numbers
random-state-p                    1                         numbers
rassoc                            2 +       c-macro         lists
rassoc-if                         2 +                       lists
rassoc-if-not                     2 +                       lists
rational                          1                         numbers
rationalize                       1                         numbers
rationalp                         1                         predicates
read                              0-4                       io
read-byte                         1-3                       io
read-char                         0-4                       io
read-char-no-hang                 0-4                       io
read-delimited-list               1-3                       io
read-from-string                  1 +                       io
read-line                         0-4                       io
read-preserving-whitespace        0-4                       io
readtable-case                    1                         io
readtablep                        1                         io
realp                             1                         predicates
realpart                          1                         numbers
reduce                            2 +                       sequences
reinitialize-instance             1 +                       clos
rem                               2                         numbers
remf                              macro                     symbols
remhash                           2                         hashtables
remove                            2 +                       sequences
remove-duplicates                 1 +                       sequences
remove-if                         2 +                       sequences
remove-if-not                     2 +                       sequences
remove-method                     2 +                       clos
remprop                           2                         symbols
rename-file                       2                         filesys
rename-package                    2-3                       packages
replace                           2 +                       sequences
require                           1-2                       packages
rest                              1         (inline)        lists
restart-bind                      macro                     conditions
restart-case                      macro                     conditions
restart-name                      1                         conditions
return                            macro                     control
return-from                       special                   control
revappend                         2                         lists
reverse                           1                         sequences
room                              0-1                       misc
rotatef                           macro                     control
round                             1-2                       numbers
row-major-aref                    2                         arrays
rplaca                            2         (inline)        lists
rplacd                            2         (inline)        lists
sbit                              1 +                       arrays
scale-float                       2                         numbers
schar                             2         (inline)        strings
search                            2 +                       sequences
second                            1         (inline)        lists
set                               2                         control
set-difference                    2 +                       lists
set-dispatch-macro-character      3-4                       io
set-exclusive-or                  2 +                       lists
set-macro-character               2-4                       io
set-syntax-from-char              2-4                       io
setf                              macro                     control
setq                              special                   control
seventh                           1         (inline)        lists
shadow                            1-2                       packages
shadowing-import                  1-2                       packages
shared-initialize                 2 +                       clos
shiftf                            macro                     control
short-site-name                   0                         misc
signal                            1 +                       conditions
signum                            1                         numbers
simple-bit-vector-p               1                         predicates
simple-condition-format-arguments  1 +                      conditions
simple-condition-format-string    1 +                       conditions
simple-string-p                   1                         predicates
simple-vector-p                   1                         predicates
sin                               1                         numbers
sinh                              1                         numbers
sixth                             1         (inline)        lists
sleep                             1                         misc
slot-boundp                       2                         clos
slot-exists-p                     2                         clos
slot-makunbound                   2                         clos
slot-missing                      4 +                       clos
slot-unbound                      3 +                       clos
slot-value                        2                         clos
software-type                     0                         misc
software-version                  0                         misc
some                              2 +                       sequences
sort                              2 +                       sequences
special-form-p                    1                         control
sqrt                              1                         numbers
stable-sort                       2 +                       sequences
standard-char-p                   1                         characters
step                              macro                     misc
store-value                       1-2                       conditions
stream-element-type               1                         io
stream-error-stream               1 +                       conditions
stream-external-format            1                         streams
streamp                           1                         streams
string                            1                         strings
string-capitalize                 1 +                       strings
string-char-p                     1                         characters
string-downcase                   1 +                       strings
string-equal                      2 +                       strings
string-greaterp                   2 +                       strings
string-left-trim                  2                         strings
string-lessp                      2 +                       strings
string-not-equal                  2 +                       strings
string-not-greaterp               2 +                       strings
string-not-lessp                  2 +                       strings
string-right-trim                 2                         strings
string-trim                       2                         strings
string-upcase                     1 +                       strings
string/=                          2 +                       strings
string<                           2 +                       strings
string<=                          2 +                       strings
string=                           2 +                       strings
string>                           2 +                       strings
string>=                          2 +                       strings
stringp                           1                         predicates
sublis                            2 +                       lists
subseq                            2-3                       sequences
subsetp                           2 +                       lists
subst                             3 +                       lists
subst-if                          3 +                       lists
subst-if-not                      3 +                       lists
substitute                        3 +                       sequences
substitute-if                     3 +                       sequences
substitute-if-not                 3 +                       sequences
subtypep                          2                         predicates
svref                             2         (inline)        arrays
sxhash                            1                         hashtables
symbol-function                   1                         control
symbol-macrolet                   special                   control
symbol-name                       1                         symbols
symbol-package                    1                         symbols
symbol-plist                      1                         symbols
symbol-value                      1                         control
symbolp                           1                         predicates
synonym-stream-symbol             1                         streams
tagbody                           special                   control
tailp                             2                         lists
tan                               1                         numbers
tanh                              1                         numbers
tenth                             1         (inline)        lists
terpri                            0-1                       io
the                               special                   declarations
third                             1         (inline)        lists
throw                             special                   control
time                              macro                     misc
trace                             macro                     misc
translate-logical-pathname        1 +                       filesys
translate-pathname                3 +                       filesys
tree-equal                        2 +                       lists
truename                          1                         filesys
truncate                          1-2                       numbers
two-way-stream-input-stream       1                         streams
two-way-stream-output-stream      1                         streams
type-error-datum                  1 +                       conditions
type-error-expected-type          1 +                       conditions
type-of                           1                         typespecs
typecase                          macro                     control
typep                             2         inline          predicates
unexport                          1-2                       packages
unintern                          1-2                       packages
union                             2 +                       lists
unless                            macro                     control
unread-char                       1-2                       io
untrace                           macro                     misc
unuse-package                     1-2                       packages
unwind-protect                    special                   control
update-instance-for-different-class  2 +                    clos
update-instance-for-redefined-class  4 +                    clos
upgraded-array-element-type       1                         typespecs
upgraded-complex-part-type        1                         typespecs
upper-case-p                      1                         characters
use-package                       1-2                       packages
use-value                         1-2                       conditions
user-homedir-pathname             0-1                       filesys
values                            0 +       inline          control
values-list                       1                         control
vector                            0 +       inline          arrays
vector-pop                        1                         arrays
vector-push                       2                         arrays
vector-push-extend                2-3                       arrays
vectorp                           1                         predicates
warn                              1 +                       conditions
when                              macro                     control
wild-pathname-p                   1-2                       filesys
with-accessors                    macro                     clos
with-compilation-unit             macro                     misc
with-condition-restarts           macro                     conditions
with-hash-table-iterator          macro                     hashtables
with-input-from-string            macro                     streams
with-open-file                    macro                     filesys
with-open-stream                  macro                     streams
with-output-to-string             macro                     streams
with-package-iterator             macro                     packages
with-simple-restart               macro                     conditions
with-slots                        macro                     clos
with-standard-io-syntax           macro                     io
write                             1 +       c-macro         io
write-byte                        2                         io
write-char                        1-2                       io
write-line                        1 +                       io
write-string                      1 +       c-macro         io
write-to-string                   1 +                       io
y-or-n-p                          0 +                       io
yes-or-no-p                       0 +                       io
zerop                             1         c-macro         numbers


-----------------------------------------------------------------------
2  Functions in the Poplog Package
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

bye                               0                         poplog_only
initlisp                          0-1                       poplog_only
make-pop11-procedure              2                         poplog_only
pop11                             0                         poplog_only
pop11-val                         1                         poplog_only
restorelisp                       1                         poplog_only
savelisp                          1 +                       poplog_only
setlisp                           0                         poplog_only



--- C.all/lisp/help/functions
--- Copyright University of Sussex 1995. All rights reserved.
